# Harmony

Each being has within him certain capacities that he is here to develop and express. The manifestation of each capacity is like a musical note, a vibration. One of the possible aims of life is to discover these notes, tune them to perfection, and harmonize them. Beethoven perhaps had just one note within him, that of musical creation, but it was a supremely powerful note that has resonated through the ages. It was mathematical creation in the case of Ramanujan, and the patterns that he has left behind continue to remain a source of wonderment to mathematicians. Like in the case of Beethoven, this note of mathematical creation was perhaps the sole preoccupation of Ramanujan's life, but one of extreme beauty and richness.

No two human destinies are alike. I believe most of us have within ourselves not just a solitary note, but a collection of notes, one or two of them being dominant and the rest quite significant but relatively smaller notes. A note has a distinct frequency, a mode of vibration. Taken in this sense, man is a bundle of vibrations. When he perfectly expresses one of these vibratory modes in an activity, he starts resonating with his inner being. This is what it means to be in a state of “flow” or “to be in the zone”.

Such “flow”-moments are rare. What could be the reasons? One is that we are doing an activity that doesn’t correspond to our principal modes of vibration. The other could be our wrong attitudes towards the work we do. It is not enough to find the right note, it is also important that we learn how to play it. Extending this argument, it is equally important to figure out how to harmonize the notes so as to produce a melody. The most common error is to turn a dominant note into the defining expression of our lives, ignoring every other note in our repertoire, and keep playing this note ad infinitum. A dull, monotonous life is the result. The other extreme is to jump between notes too frequently, not sounding the depths of any of them, producing a cacophony of discordant notes. This too is inimical to our growth.

The initial period must be one of search, and the fruit of this search is the discovery of the principal modes that govern our being. The second period is one of organization, where we synthesize the various elements to produce a melody that becomes our true identity. The duration of the first phase is crucial. If it draws to a premature close, mostly because of insufficient exploration on our parts, then the second period becomes a mechanical organization of a set of activities that are not the expression of the capacities within us. Or the first period may never end, probably because we have overlooked our discovery of these principal modes of our being and continue to search in vain. This would mean that there is no organization in our life, it is a complete chaos, an interminable stream of random activities that succeed one after the other.

There is no guarantee that we will succeed in this endeavor. But we have a pointer to guide us. These periods must not be exclusive of each other: there must be some organization in our lives as we search, and an element of search as we begin to organize various activities. If we are sincere in our search and do not let lower motives cloud our judgement, the divine will guide us closer and closer to the harmony that best expresses us.

## References

This essay is just a restatement of the Mother's [answer](https://incarnateword.in/cwm/02/14-may-1912) to the following question: 

> What is my place in the universal work?
