# Using Wikipedia

While Wikipedia is an excellent reference for anything you would like to know about, it is not a good source to learn something from scratch or to learn it deeply. It can act as a good reference for someone who is already familiar with the topic. This is not Wikipedia's fault, as it is the default design of every encyclopedia. So it is perfectly admissible if an article is severely austere in its description of a phenomenon or a concept, just stating the bare facts and not providing a thorough reasoning to back up any of these facts. In short, it lacks the pedagogical support learners look for when encountering a subject for the first time. In fact, learning about a topic from Wikipedia for the first time may actually result in a poor mental representation of a concept in the minds of learners.

Take for example the entry on <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parallelogram" target="blank">parallelograms</a>. The introduction seems harmless, but look at the section titled "Characterizations". It is a list of properties that the parallelogram satisfies. The list is admirable in that it is exhaustive, but for a first-time learner it will just be a collection of mathematical statements that he has to verify. The element of discovery is absent. Everything is placed in front of him, already established, while his job is to go over each statement, convince himself that it is indeed true, and then move on to some other topic. Thus we need alternate sources on the internet that can present the same content backed up by a sound pedagogical approach, while maintaining the breadth of coverage that an encyclopedia offers.

